# BDEtools

An open-source MATLAB package for solving sets of Boolean delay equations

## Introduction

Systems of Boolean Delay Equations (BDEs) – in which time is continuous but state is binary – are capable of generating surprisingly complex behaviour, despite their apparent simplicity [1,2]. In addition to simulating convergence to steady states, BDEs can also generate periodic and quasiperiodic oscillations, 𝑚:𝑛 frequency locking and even chaotic dynamics [3]. Furthermore, the enumerability of the Boolean update functions and the compact parametrisation resulting from discretisation means that BDE systems can be readily leveraged to generate low-level descriptions of physical systems, from which more quantitative model formulations (e.g. differential equations) can be constructed [4]. The utility of BDE modelling in this regard has been demonstrated in several fields, including computational biology and climate science [4-11], but the use of BDEs is still primarily restricted to a few research laboratories. In order to facilitate the wider adoption of the BDE formalism by the computational modelling community, BDEtools has been developed to enable researchers to construct, solve and analyse BDE systems in a straightforward fashion.

## Overview of file structure

<ul> 
<li> <b>code/</b> -- BDEtools solvers and utility routines
<li> <b>examples/</b> -- four examples illustrating the use of the solvers and utility routines: 
<ol>  
  <li> a simple two-component model that generates a periodic solution 
  <li> a minimal model of circadian oscillations in the fungus <i>N. crassa</i> [4]  
  <li> a simple two-component model that generates accumulating switches [2]
  <li> a climate model of the El-Ni&ntildeo Southern Oscillation [6] 
</ol>  
<li> <b>models/</b> -- BDEtools implementations of the circadian clock models presented in [4].
<li> <b>models/</b> -- unit tests to check the correct impementations of the systems in <b>models/</b>
</ul>  

## Examples of use

<b>negfback_example.m</b> -- This compares the analytical and numerical solutions to a BDE model of a two-component negative feedback loop. To use, enter <br> 
&gt;&gt; negfback_example <br>
at the MATLAB command prompt.

<b>circadian_example.m</b> -- This solves the <i>N. crassa</i> model of [4]  over the time interval 0 &le; <em>t</em><120, using histories generated by thresholding synthetic gene expression data. In addition to the default (parallel) solver, solutions are also generated using a solver that calculates the solutions to the BDE equations when each equation is solved independently of the others [11] (the serial solver). To implement the example, enter <br> 
&gt;&gt; sol = circadian_example <br>
at the MATLAB command prompt. The prediction errors are also calculated. 

<b>chaotic_example.m</b> -- This solves [2] for a delay combination that yields solutions of increasing complexity. For example, to solve over the time interval 0 &le; <em>t</em><40 and plot the solution, enter <br> 
&gt;&gt; sol = chaotic_example(40) <br>
at the MATLAB command prompt. The number of switches per unit time is also plotted as a function of time.

<b>ENSO_example.m</b> -- This solves [6] for a delay combination that simulates synchronisation of the system to the seasonal cycle forcing. For example, to solve over the time interval 0 &le; <em>t</em><50 and plot the solution, enter <br> 
&gt;&gt; sol = ENSO_example(50) <br>
at the MATLAB command prompt. Note that the initial transient preceding the onset of synchronisation is also shown.

## Unit tests

For each model, there are two unit test files: one which returns solutions and solver errors for the nominal delay parameter combination in [4] over different simulated light environments (<b><em>modelname</em>_test.m</b>) and one which also generates plots of the corresponding solutions (<b><em>modelname</em>_test_wplot.m</b>).

For example, to run the unit test for the BDE formulation of the <em>Arabidopsis</em> circadian clock model introduced in [12] with plotting, enter <br> 
&gt;&gt; [solerr, solcell, solSercell] = arabid3lp_test_wplot<br>
at the MATLAB command prompt.  The routine calculates the solution in each of the following light environments: LL (from a constant history), LL (from the LL limit cycle), 12L:12D (from the LL limit cycle), 9L:5D (from the 12L:12D limit cycle) and 15L:9D (from the 12L:12D limit cycle). These (parallel) solutions are stored in the cell <b>solcell</b> and also fed in as histories to the serial solver -- the serial solutions are returned in the cell  <b>solSercell</b>. For each light environment, the Hamming distance between the parallel and serial solutions gives the integration error, and is returned in the vector <b>solerr</b>, which should have entries very close to 0 (<em>e.g.</em><0.01).

## License

BDEtools is released under the MIT license.

## References

[1] D. Dee and M. Ghil. Boolean difference equations, i: Formulation and dynamic behavior. SIAM J. Appl. Math., 44(1):111–126, 1984. 
<br>
[2] M. Ghil and A. Mullhaupt. Boolean delay equations. ii. periodic and aperiodic solutions. J. Stat. Phys., 41(1):125–173, 1985.
<br>
[3] M. Ghil, I. Zaliapin, and B. Coluzzi. Boolean delay equations: A simple way of looking at complex systems. Physica D, 237(23):2967–2986, 2008.
<br>
[4] O.E. Akman, S. Watterson, A. Parton, N. Binns, A.J. Millar, and P. Ghazal. Digital clocks: simple Boolean models can quantitatively describe circadian systems. J. Roy. Soc. Interface, 9(74):2365–2382, 2012.
<br>
[5] M. Ghil, A. Mullhaupt, and P. Pestiaux. Deep water formation and quaternary glaciations. Climate Dynamics, 2(1):1–10, 1987.
<br>
[6] A. Saunders and M. Ghil. A Boolean delay equation model of ENSO variability. Physica D, 160:54–78, 2001.
<br>
[7] H. Öktem, R. Pearson, and K. Egiazarian. An adjustable aperiodic model class of genomic interactions using continuous time Boolean networks (Boolean delay equations). Chaos, 13(4):1167–1174, 2003.
<br>
[8] R. Zhang, H.L.D. de S.Cavalcante, Z. Gao, D.J. Gauthier, J.E.S. Socolar, M.M. Adams, and D.P. Lathrop. Boolean chaos. Phys. Rev. E, 80:045202, 2009.
<br>
[9] V. Sevim, X. Gong, and J.E.A. Socolar. Reliability of transcriptional cycles and the yeast cell-cycle oscillator. PLoS Comput. Biol., 6(7):e1000842, 2010.
<br>
[10] K. Doherty, K. Alyahya, O.E. Akman, and J.E. Fieldsend. Optimisation and landscape analysis of computational biology models: A case study. In Proc. GECCO 2017, pages 1644–1651, 2017.
<br>
[11] O.E. Akman and J.E. Fieldsend. Multi-objective optimisation of gene regulatory networks: Insights from a Boolean circadian clock model. In Proc. BICOB 2020, volume 70, pages 149–162, 2020.
<br>
[12] J.C.W. Locke, L. Kozma-Bognar, P.D. Gould, B. Fehér, E. Kevei, F. Nagy, M.S. Turner, A. Hall, and A.J. Millar. 2006. Experimental validation of a predicted feedback loop in the multi-oscillator clock of Arabidopsis thaliana. Mol. Syst. Biol. 2:59, 2006.

<hr>
&#169; Akman Laboratory of Automated Biotechnology, 2021
